---
title: "Steps to setup TailwindCSS with Create React App using POSTCSS"
date: "2019-01-05"
slug: "setup-tailwind-cra-postcss-purgecss"
---

Originally posted on [Medium](https://medium.com/@ajitid/steps-to-setup-tailwind-with-react-using-postcss-66147b93f5f4)

Other blog/Medium posts directly tell you to eject from create-react-app, but that’s not needed. Also they don’t discuss about production setup, that’s why I have written this post.

TLDR: You can directly pull the [setup from here](https://github.com/goandbuild/cra-postcss-tailwind).

1. Make a React app using create-react-app

2. Install Tailwind and PostCSS CLI with

```bash
npm i -D tailwindcss postcss-cli
```

3. Make a Tailwind config using `npx tailwind init` or `./node_modules/.bin/tailwind init`. This command creates tailwind.js at root of your project. NPX comes installed alongwith NodeJS and NPM.

4. Now create postcss.config.js file at root of your project and write the following

```js
const tailwindcss = require('tailwindcss');

module.exports = {
  plugins: [
    tailwindcss('./tailwind.js')
  ]
}
```

5. In src/ create tailwind-own.css and write this

```css
@tailwind preflight;
@tailwind components;
@tailwind utilities;
```

6. Import “./tailwind.css” (not “./tailwind-own.css”) in your index.js. As code with `@tailwind` in tailwind-own.css is not valid CSS, we will use POSTCSS to transform this tailwind-own.css to valid CSS in tailwind.css which will then be imported and used by React app.

```js
import './tailwind.css';
```

7. Change your `scripts` of package.json to include command which runs POSTCSS in watch mode. In the code below, `start:tw` takes in src/tailwind-own.css and outputs src/tailwind.css which contains valid CSS, and as you have imported tailwind.css in your index.js, you will get all Tailwind utility classes. `-w` in `start:tw` enables watch mode, so it will watch for any changes in tailwind-own.css and will remake tailwind.css accordingly.

```json
"scripts": {
    "start:tw": "postcss ./src/tailwind-own.css -o ./src/tailwind.css -w",
    "start": "react-scripts start",
    "build": "react-scripts build",
    "test": "react-scripts test --env=jsdom",
    "eject": "react-scripts eject"
  },
```


8. Now run your app. You will need two different commands, one to start up POSTCSS in watch mode using `start:tw` and and other to run React app as usual.

```bash
npm run start:tw
```

```bash
npm start
```

9. Use any of Tailwind’s utility classes and it’ll work! 🎉

## Setup for production

Try running `npm run build`. You’ll see 35KB+ of CSS being generated even if you have used two classes or so.

We will use PurgeCSS to strip all unused CSS. Install it with

```bash
npm i -D @fullhuman/postcss-purgecss
```

Now change your postcss.config.js which you had created to include code which removes unused CSS for production.

```js
const tailwindcss = require('tailwindcss');
const purgecss = require('@fullhuman/postcss-purgecss');

module.exports = {
  plugins: [
    tailwindcss('./tailwind.js'),
    process.env.NODE_ENV==="production" &&  purgecss({
      content: ['./src/**/*.js'],
      css: ['./src/**/*.css'],
    })
  ]
}
```

`content` denotes the places where you have used CSS classes.

Also add this line in “scripts” of your package.json

```json
"build:tw": "postcss ./src/tailwind-own.css -o ./src/tailwind.css --env production"
```

Now to build it for production, we first need to run

```bash
npm run build:tw
```

which creates stripped tailwind.css and then we will run

```bash
npm run build
```

to get out our production files.

Now look at CSS bundle size. It will be a few KBs or so. Nice.

As said at starting of this post, if you don’t want to setup all this you can go to [this repo](https://github.com/goandbuild/cra-postcss-tailwind) and download React app which has all this pre-configured.
